The death of Frank R. Lautenberg on Monday has left Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey with the kind of opportunity that politicians usually covet: the chance to give away a seat in the United States Senate. But the decision is fraught with pitfalls, none bigger than having to choose between improving his party’s fortunes in Washington and furthering his own political ambitions at home.
Multimedia

Lautenberg’s Seat and Booker’s Chance
Related

Frank Lautenberg, New Jersey Senator in His 5th Term, Dies at 89 (June 4, 2013)
Enlarge This Image
 
Mel Evans/Associated Press
Mayor Cory A. Booker of Newark with Gov. Chris Christie.
Readers’ Comments
Share your thoughts.
Post a Comment »
Read All Comments (106) »
Mr. Christie, a Republican, is up for re-election in November and hoping to secure a huge victory margin, which he could then use to accelerate his drive to present himself as a presidential candidate with broad appeal even in a blue state.

But adding a special election for the Senate seat to the ballot could put Mayor Cory A. Booker of Newark at the top of the Democratic ticket, potentially energizing more Democrats, who already outnumber Republicans in New Jersey by 700,000 registered voters, to come to the polls.

The implications extend beyond New Jersey to Washington, where both parties are maneuvering for strategic advantage in a Senate where even a single vote can derail legislation. The appointment of a Republican as the interim replacement for Mr. Lautenberg, a Democrat, would create immediate complications for the White House and Democrats on Capitol Hill as they try to push through presidential nominations and an overhaul of immigration laws under the constant threat of Republican filibuster.

Mr. Lautenberg, a steadfast liberal who was New Jersey’s longest serving senator and the nation’s oldest senator, died of complications from pneumonia in Manhattan. He was 89 and had already announced he would not run for re-election next year.

Mr. Christie, whose popularity soared after Hurricane Sandy, is so eager to avoid appearing on the same ballot as Mr. Booker, according to Republican insiders, that he is considering two alternatives to a November election for Mr. Lautenberg’s successor. Each carries a potential political cost, and the dispute could easily be challenged in court.

The option that is being pushed by many in Mr. Christie’s own party would be to name a Republican to hold the seat and then delay an election on a replacement until 2014. This would give his national party an unexpected gift: a reliable vote in the Senate — for a year and a half, at least — from a state that has not elected a Republican to the upper house in 41 years. But it would also open Mr. Christie up to allegations of sidestepping the electoral process.

The alternative, lawyers in both parties said, would be for Mr. Christie to set a primary election as early as August, which would mean a special election in October. This would leave Democrats in a stronger position to win the seat. Mr. Booker, in particular, benefits from a high national profile and strong fund-raising, though he would be quite likely to face a primary challenge. But it would also open Mr. Christie to accusations that he was wasting some $24 million in taxpayer money by holding those two extra elections ahead of the regular November balloting for self-interested political reasons.

He also risks alienating Republican donors, whom he needs to woo. Mr. Lautenberg’s death came a few days before Mr. Christie is to attend a meeting of some of the biggest Republican fund-raisers, some of whom believe that Mr. Christie’s embrace of President Obama after the hurricane damaged their party’s nominee, Mitt Romney.

“There are probably 49 other governors who would love to be in the position that Chris Christie is in right now,” said Brigid Callahan Harrison, a professor and seasoned observer of New Jersey politics at Montclair State University. “But it really presents him with a Pandora’s box of political choices.”

The high stakes pose a new test for Mr. Christie, who over the last year has made perhaps the most finely tuned calibration between the two parties of any politician in America. After building a reputation as one of the nation’s most visible and popular Republicans, he has won praise and support from Democrats across his state with his criticism of his own party and his praise for Mr. Obama in the aftermath of the hurricane.
